1.30 with Professor Willis Pequenot,
P-E-Q-U-E-G-N-O-T.
Present interview, Robert Calvert and Professor
Pequenot.
Professor Pecklenaut, what we would like to know
is what took you to Berkeley in 36 as a science
major, where I understand you stayed through a PhD
in 42, and what direction or what influence led you
to a degree in what appears to be environmental
science? Yes. I went to Berkeley in 36. I left
Berkeley actually in 36 as a result of the fact that
They had established a marine science program at
La Jolla, California, as a matter of fact, around
the turn of the century. By the time I went there, it
was very well known, and it was beginning to be
called Scripps Institution of Oceanography. But
actually, it was the zoology department of
Berkeley that established this laboratory. I had
come to know some of the men who were on the staff at
Berkeley. And I thought they were excellent
people, and so I went up there to study with them.
While there, I had always at that time to keep in
mind where one could get a job, because the
Depression was still having an effect in
California. And so I drifted into other
departments. I took some work in agriculture. I
did some work in soil chemistry to prepare myself
for that civil service area. I took work in
vertebrate zoology, marine zoology. And so the
University of California had no major for me. And
as a consequence, they created one, which they
called environmental science. And thus, I got the
first degree that they ever had. And maybe they
haven't had another one since of this type.
Actually, I was going to stay on. and I have to
correct one point on your statement, at Berkeley
for a Ph.D., but it happened that a teaching
fellowship opened up at UCLA, and they were just
then, in 1937, given the authorization to grant
Ph.D.s in zoological science. So I... They
offered me a teaching fellowship down there. And I
was advised by the head of the department at
Berkeley that these were very hard to come by, and
it might be a good idea to go down there for a
master's, particularly since I could study with
Loy Holmes Miller, who had been a member of the
Science Party on the Albatross, which had made an
oceanographic cruise all through the Gulf of
Mexico and in the Pacific region. And so I went down
to work with Loy Holmes Miller in 37, and it became
very evident that I might be the only PhD he would
ever have since he was approaching retirement. He
was head of the zoology department down there. And
for many other reasons, I decided to stay on. So I
got both my master's and PhD at the University of
California, Los Angeles. At that time, UCLA was
the parent institution for Scripps Institution
of Oceanography. And as a consequence of this, we
had men coming from Scripps to teach courses in
marine science, and I became an assistant to
Martin Johnson, who was a zooplankton specialist
at the Scripps Institution at the time. Also,
Sverdrup was then director. He came up. I got to
know him very well. Roger Rebell was then working
his way up gradually. I had first met Roger Rebell
when he was a geologist at Scripps back in 32, I
think. And so it was just a natural event that I
became more and more interested in marine aspects
of biological science. And at the same time, I
became the assistant to Professor George
McGinnity of Caltech, who also came to, he was one
of the foremost marine ecologists. He came to
offer coursework. And it's my interest in marine
science why it was natural that I would become his
assistant. As a result of all these things, I
decided that this might be the thing for me to
specialize in. In 1940, I was invited to go to
Pomona College as an instructor. And they had a
marine laboratory at Laguna Beach, California,
which had been established
Soon after, University of California at Berkeley
had established their marine laboratory at .
Pardon me. Can we do something? I don't know if the
secretary has gone or not. Sure. Hello? And so I
began teaching
courses in marine ecology and marine
invertebrates in the summer of 1940, which I
continued at Laguna Beach. until 1946 when I went
to the University of Chicago for a time in 47. And
then came back and was invited to teach at the
California Institute of Technology Marine
Laboratory at Corona del Mar. Meanwhile, I kept
associations with people at Scripps. And in 55, I
went on to become a research associate down there
while I was on leave and also a consultant to a large
vitamin corporation who were interested in
developing natural vitamins from marine
organisms. And at that time, I went to Europe for
these people to get a large oceanographic vessel
built. somewhere in Europe, finally ended up in
Germany after
long excursions through Holland and
Scandinavian countries and so on. So that
I kept this activity going until 1960 when I went to
the National Science Foundation and then was
invited by people here to come to become an
oceanographer in the Gulf of Mexico region. I had
never thought of really calling myself an
oceanographer, actually. And when I came here, I
found that there was no knowledge of the deep ocean
in the Gulf, and so I began to specialize in that.
And we're just completing the first major report
on that, and I'm preparing a book on the deep
aspects of the Gulf of Mexico.
So that's a quick run through that. I came here in
1963.
Meanwhile, I had gone to, for very short periods of
time, I became head of the Department of biology
with particular interest in marine science at
State University of New York at Stony Brook. I
resigned in protest there because they had fired
the president, so I didn't stay very long. I went
back to NSF. Oh, was this 62, 63? Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
It's an interval in there that I don't like to
remember because it looked like such a promising
thing. They were getting ready to establish a
major marine installation on Long Island Sound,
but I felt that they had unfairly fired the
president and appealed to Nelson Rockefeller,
and he turned the appeal down. But some years
later, he admitted he had been misadvised and He
made reparations to the president, who had left,
of course, and wrote letters of apology to most of
us who had protested. But it was too late then. I
wasn't going back anyway. What was he fired? For
what was he fired? Presumably for being
relatively incompetent in terms of the future
development of the university, that he was
attempting to do it much too fast, that he wasn't an
orderly individual, while he was a statistical
thermodynamicist and he was loaded with
intellect, so there was no problem. It was just
internal jealousy. After I came here, I found this
was a little bit of a problem area. There was a good
deal of dissension in the department. And since I
was the newest member, I was asked to be acting head
of the Department of Oceanography and
Meteorology for presumably six months by Rutter.
I had come here to get away from the
administration. If I'd wanted that, I could have
stayed at NSF. But Earl Rutter, who was then
president,
insisted, really, that I do this as a very personal
favor for six months when it lasted for two and a
half years, which was... Well, we have it 63-64.
Well, I actually can't remember now. I think it was
till 66. I think I left it in July of 66, whenever
Dick Geyer came. I think he came in 66. In 66. True.
Then you didn't come specifically to build the
Department of Oceanography here at A&A? No, I did
not. I came to really develop ocean-going
biological oceanography because when I came
there was one microscope in the Department for
Biological Use. Al Syed had been here working on a
project on the Mississippi Delta At the time, he
had not started with the Antarctic. Macken had
been the biological oceanographer, and
apparently he had left with some kind of ill
feelings going on. And as a matter of course,
whether he took things to biology or not, I don't
know. But at any rate, there was nothing here to
work with, so we had to sort of build things up a
little bit. But meanwhile, the Alaminos arrived,
and under the the guidance of Hugh McClellan, the
Alaminas was outfitted as a research vessel. John
Lyman was then head of the oceanography program at
NSF, and it provided, I think, roughly a million
dollars for the job. And I think that Dr.
McClellan, who's a physical oceanographer now
with Sea Grant, did really an excellent job of
refitting that vessel. As a matter of fact, I
personally feel it's a much better vessel than the
gyre. I don't know whether you say these things or
not, but I really think it was one of the nicer
ocean-going vessels. It had its problems, but it
certainly was a good oceanographic vessel.
But as always, remember that oceanography, prior
to the Second World War was wholly physical
oceanography. There were some geological
aspects to be sure, but including that as a
physical fact. So that people such as Martin
Johnson, who was then at Scripps, had to fight for
every day they got aboard a ship in order to sample.
And as a consequence of this, I think that most
ships were outfitted for physical activities and
not for biological activities. If I had been here a
year sooner, it could have been modified because I
became a very, well, McClellan and I became good
friends and he was willing to listen, but it was too
late to modify. Now, when you speak of being
outfitted for physical versus marine, exactly
what do you mean? No, marine biological.
Well, there are many things that biologists need.
They need much more workspace on the aft section of
a vessel. Most of the equipment
had to go over on the starboard forward quarter of
the vessel. whereas it would have been much nicer
had we been able to put things over directly from
the stern. As it was, I had to fairly lead cables
along the side of the vessel at great distances. Of
course, when I was working in the deep water, as
deep as I could go, and furthermore, you see, we
should have had a bigger winch. They only had
30,000 feet of 7-16ths cable on the vessel. It
would have been nice if we'd had 40,000.
and probably gone to half-inch cable, we could
have reached deeper aspects of the Caribbean. But
we had five or six miles of wire out, obviously,
when we were dredging the bottom. Of course, it's
the basis now. That collection is the basis for the
systematic collection in this department, which
my wife is now curating, fortunately. But I have it
scattered from the air base to private storage to
this area, plus the collection. And it'll be some
years before it's completed. When the first work
was done in the Gulf of Mexico by Louis Agassiz
aboard the Blake, he had 70 people to aid him in the
small deep sea collection that he put together.
And we've had on the average of two or three. And
we've had a collection perhaps 75 to 100 times the
size of his. So we've had a little go. But we have
just put out a major report on the upper
continental slope of the northern Gulf of Mexico.
And as I say, I'm deep in the manuscript now of one
that will cover the abyssal aspects of the Gulf of
Mexico and northern Caribbean. Is this all
encompassing now? Does that cover all the species
that you're finding or are you restricted to
certain types, certain sizes? No, the work that
we're doing is total. In other words, we have What
we've done on the currents, what we have done as
biologists on the sedimentology, what we have
done from fishes to sponges. So it is all
encompassing. We're trying to create an
ecosystem approach, ecosystem analysis as well.
So it is a thoroughgoing ecological look at this.
We are not able to quantitate as we would like to,
but we do have a quasi quantitation in, you know, we
know roughly the size of these dredges we've been
using, or trawls. I used a trawl that was 20 meters,
had a 20 meter gape, and had Chinese V-boards that
weighed about 750 pounds apiece. And the net
itself was about 30 meters long, so it was a
gigantic thing to handle, you know, in deep water.
But we managed to do it. Deep water sampling is a
little bit trying because it takes perhaps an hour
and a half to get the trawl on the bottom and may take
as long to bring it back up. As a matter of fact, I got
it caught on some rocks in the deep aspect of the
Columbian Basin in the Caribbean. all but about
300 feet of wire out, and I was caught on the bottom.
And the profiler, the precision depth recorder
profile, showed that I was hooked on the rock wall
of this basin. And it took me eight hours to release
it. I didn't leave the winch control forward, and I
had to pull the ship backwards all the time,
because my winch was more powerful than the ship.
And so I could stop the ship, and with that thing
caught on this gigantic wall, which was, oh, I
don't know, it must have been 8,000 or 9,000 feet
high. The water was about 14,000 feet there deep, I
think. Well, I worked eight hours, and of course
that's in the trade winds. I had to keep pulling the
ship back against these steady swells coming in,
And the swells would break on the aft end of the
vessel, and it was 180 feet long, and that thing
would come flying clear on over. Spray would fly
clear over onto the bridge. So I never had a
friendly word with the captain after that day. But
at any rate, I got it off, and interestingly
enough, it had three new species of animals in it.
And it had rocks which had never been seen in the
Caribbean before, and for which several
expeditions had gone there to find, costing
hundreds of thousands of dollars. And in this one
accident, we got that set of rocks. We published a
short paper on it, but others have gone down there
now and have taken those samples. Well, do we have a
breather to see where we're going? Oh, we know
where we're going. Do you consider yourself a
generalist rather than a specialist? I was
reading your publication list. This possibly
answers part of the question. Yes, well, I think my
broad background does explain some interests.
You see, I started out, actually started out
getting an interest in biological things because
of the fact that I traveled with a group of students
led by a biologically inclined professor in
Riverside on the desert for at least three years.
And I got to the point where I knew every shrub and
animal on the desert. So this was in the period from
about 29 to 33, somewhere in there.
Then, when I went to UCLA, I decided that I needed to
get some terrestrial biology, so I studied the
biology of an entire mountain range. Was that when
you were a ranger in 39? No. That was as a result of
that work, I was invited by the Park Service to
become a trainee to take a position with the
National Park Service in Washington. And they
wanted me to start by going first to Yosemite
National Park and then to Lassen Volcanic to learn
both the biological and the physical, since
Lassen, of course, was then still considered an
active volcano. But as a result of these things, I
was very fortunate. I took ornithology with one of
the really great ornithologists of the West,
Joseph Grinnell. I took plant physiology with one
of the great plant physiologists of his time at
Berkeley. And I took genetics with men that were
foremost and was even invited to be an assistant to
Theodosius Dobzhansky, who just died, who was one
of the leading geneticists
from Columbia University and then to Caltech. I
met Thomas Hunt Morgan, who was one of the really
important geneticists who introduced
Drosophila fruit fly as the genetics vehicle. I
became very good friends with George Beadle, who
Beadle and Tatum were the first ones to do the one
gene, one enzyme, one gene theory for which they
got the Nobel Prize. And I'm not bragging about it,
but it just happened. These people fell into my
life, and they inspired me to read very broadly in
biological science. And as a consequence of these
experiences, have had to become a generalist.
I've been interested in anything that would fit
into a better understanding of the machinery that
drives the natural systems.
So I think that this also started through one
course, and I sometimes do feel that students can
be inspired by a course, although many of them feel
no longer this kind of feeling. I took a course in
the history of science at Berkeley. And that
course, which drew specialists from all over the
country to lecture in their areas, whether it be
medicine, pharmacology, biology, physics,
whatever, was one of the most inspiring courses I
ever took. Now, the book itself was also that way.
Obviously, if you're tracing the history of
science, you realize how general the people were.
Certainly, Aristotle is the epitome of that. But
even coming up after the Renaissance, you've got
the generalist. And of course, analytical
specialist so much in sway when I was going to
university. But it was in the 40s that people began
to realize that analytical approach to science
was no longer going to work. And it was for this
reason in the biological area that ecology came
into its own. There are still people here who
debate whether ecology is a science. They just
don't have any a fundamental knowledge of
intellectuality when they asked that question.
Synthesis became the word beginning in the 40s. At
the same time, there were those who were working
not only in molecular biology, but beginning at
Caltech to work in sub-molecular biology. Now it
was because of George Beadle, who was then
chairman of the biological division of Caltech,
that Crick and Watson came to Caltech and
synthesized their knowledge to get an insight
into DNA, which of course set genetics off in a
whole new area. So that was about the 52 period, 53
period in there. George Beadle's still alive. You
know, he went to become president of the
University of Chicago. He's now doing, still
doing interesting work in genetics on corn, which
turns out to be an exciting vehicle to study. It
doesn't seem like it would be, but genetics of corn
takes you all over, you know, because obviously
it's I'm going to not comment on that. That's
getting out of oceanography. One quick question.
Do you think that oceanographers are more
inclined to be generalists than, let's say,
specialists?
Yes, I feel so. And I feel this is very natural. We
are still following what was laid down in scripts
years ago as to the curriculum in the early years.
And this by its very nature indicates that if
you're going to understand the ocean as a system,
you've got to know something about all aspects of
the ocean. The answer, therefore, is that those
who have come through the oceanographic
curriculum generally are more inclined to a broad
view. Those who have come from engineering,
however, tend to be highly specialized. And we see
this in this department, even. And you see it
almost in every major institution where
engineers have entered the field.
So that I would say, though, that those who go
through oceanography as a curriculum tend to be
much broader in their perspective than those
who've entered from a single discipline. Just
happened, my training was very broad. And so it was
natural that I should come there. But I put out a
little paper on currents because I couldn't find
anybody who would know anything about the
currents in the bottom. The time I wrote that
paper, there weren't many who believed there were
any currents in the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico.
Here, for example, I did something with geology
because I needed to know something about that
aspect. Go ahead with your question, maybe. No,
I'm fine.